README.md, before:

# OTP Input Authentication – Monorepo

A full‑stack **OTP-based email verification system** built as a **monorepo**, with a React (Vite) frontend and a Node.js (Express) backend.

Live URL : https://verifyemailviaotp.netlify.app/

The project demonstrates:

* OTP generation & email delivery
* OTP verification flow
* Monorepo setup with shared local package
* Production deployment using **Netlify (Frontend)** and **Render (Backend)**

---

## 📁 Project Structure

```text
otp-input-monorepo/
├── client/        # Frontend (React + Vite)
├── server/        # Backend (Node.js + Express)
├── netlify.toml   # Netlify monorepo configuration
├── package.json   # Root scripts (concurrently)
└── README.md
```

---

## 🛠 Tech Stack

### Frontend

* React 19
* Vite
* JavaScript (ES Modules)
* Fetch API

### Backend

* Node.js
* Express
* MongoDB (Mongoose)
* Nodemailer (Email OTP)
* JSON Web Token (JWT)
* CORS

### Dev / Tooling

* Monorepo (local package linking)
* Concurrently
* Netlify (Frontend hosting)
* Render (Backend hosting)

---

## 🚀 Local Development Setup

### 1️⃣ Clone the repository

```bash
git clone <repo-url>
cd otp-input-monorepo
```

---

### 2️⃣ Install dependencies (client + server)

```bash
npm run install:all
```

---

### 3️⃣ Environment Variables

#### Server (`server/.env`)

```env
PORT=5000
MONGO_URL=your_mongodb_connection_string
EMAIL_USER=your_email
EMAIL_PASS=your_email_password
JWT_SECRET=your_secret_key
CLIENT_URL=http://localhost:5173
```

> ⚠️ Do not commit `.env` files

---

### 4️⃣ Run the project locally

```bash
npm run dev
```

* Frontend → `http://localhost:5173`
* Backend → `http://localhost:5000`

---

## 🔐 OTP Authentication Flow

1. User enters email in frontend
2. Frontend sends request to backend
3. Backend:

   * Generates OTP
   * Sends OTP via email
   * Stores OTP temporarily
4. User enters OTP
5. Backend verifies OTP
6. Verification success / failure response returned

---

## 🌍 Production Deployment

### Backend (Render)

* Create a **Web Service**
* Root Directory: `server`
* Build Command:

  ```bash
  npm install
  ```
* Start Command:

  ```bash
  npm start
  ```

#### Render Environment Variables

```env
PORT=10000
MONGO_URL=...
EMAIL_USER=...
EMAIL_PASS=...
JWT_SECRET=...
CLIENT_URL=https://verifyemailviaotp.netlify.app
```

---

### Frontend (Netlify)

Deployment handled via `netlify.toml` at repo root.

```toml
[build]
  base = "client"
  command = "npm run build"
  publish = "dist"

[[redirects]]
  from = "/*"
  to = "/index.html"
  status = 200
```

#### Netlify Environment Variables

```env
VITE_API_URL=https://otp-input-1.onrender.com
```
---

## 👩‍💻 Author

**Vijayashree**
Frontend Developer

---

## ⭐ Future Improvements

* Rate limiting OTP requests
* OTP expiration cleanup job
* UI validation & error handling
* Unit & integration tests

---

Feel free to fork, explore, and extend 🚀

Commit message:

Revise README for Resend email delivery integration
Updated the README to reflect changes in email delivery service from Nodemailer to Resend, including new environment variable requirements and additional notes.

README.md, after:

# OTP Input Authentication – Monorepo

A full‑stack **OTP-based email verification system** built as a **monorepo**, with a React (Vite) frontend and a Node.js (Express) backend.

The project demonstrates:

* OTP generation & email delivery
* OTP verification flow
* Monorepo setup with shared local package
* Production deployment using **Netlify (Frontend)** and **Render (Backend)**

---

## 📁 Project Structure

```text
otp-input-monorepo/
├── client/        # Frontend (React + Vite)
├── server/        # Backend (Node.js + Express)
├── netlify.toml   # Netlify monorepo configuration
├── package.json   # Root scripts (concurrently)
└── README.md
```

---

## 🛠 Tech Stack

### Frontend

* React 19
* Vite
* JavaScript (ES Modules)
* Fetch API

### Backend

* Node.js
* Express
* MongoDB (Mongoose)
* Resend (Email OTP via HTTP API)
* JSON Web Token (JWT)
* CORS

### Dev / Tooling

* Monorepo (local package linking)
* Concurrently
* Netlify (Frontend hosting)
* Render (Backend hosting)

---

## 🚀 Local Development Setup

### 1️⃣ Clone the repository

```bash
git clone <repo-url>
cd otp-input-monorepo
```

---

### 2️⃣ Install dependencies (client + server)

```bash
npm run install:all
```

---

### 3️⃣ Environment Variables

#### Server (`server/.env`)

```env
PORT=5000
MONGO_URL=your_mongodb_connection_string
PORT=5000
MONGO_URL=your_mongodb_connection_string
RESEND_API_KEY=your_resend_api_key
JWT_SECRET=your_secret_key
CLIENT_URL=http://localhost:5173
```

> ⚠️ Do not commit `.env` files

---

### 4️⃣ Run the project locally

```bash
npm run dev
```

* Frontend → `http://localhost:5173`
* Backend → `http://localhost:5000`

---

## 🔐 OTP Authentication Flow

1. User enters email in frontend
2. Frontend sends request to backend
3. Backend:

   * Generates OTP
   * Sends OTP via email
   * Stores OTP temporarily
4. User enters OTP
5. Backend verifies OTP
6. Verification success / failure response returned

---

## 📧 Email & OTP Delivery (Production)

This project uses **Resend** for sending OTP emails in production.

> Nodemailer with Gmail SMTP was removed due to performance and reliability issues in cloud environments (timeouts, throttling, blocked SMTP connections).

### Why Resend?

* No SMTP (HTTP-based, very fast)
* Reliable on Render
* Sub-second email delivery

### Backend (Render)

* Create a **Web Service**
* Root Directory: `server`
* Build Command:

  ```bash
  npm install
  ```
* Start Command:

  ```bash
  npm start
  ```

#### Render Environment Variables

```env
PORT=10000
MONGO_URL=...
PORT=10000
MONGO_URL=...
RESEND_API_KEY=...
JWT_SECRET=...
CLIENT_URL=https://verifyemailviaotp.netlify.app
```

---

### Frontend (Netlify)

Deployment handled via `netlify.toml` at repo root.

```toml
[build]
  base = "client"
  command = "npm run build"
  publish = "dist"

[[redirects]]
  from = "/*"
  to = "/index.html"
  status = 200
```

#### Netlify Environment Variables

```env
VITE_API_URL=https://otp-input-1.onrender.com
```

---

## 📌 Notes

* `node_modules` and `.git` should not be committed in real projects
* This repo is structured for learning & demonstration
* Suitable for portfolio / interview discussion

---

## 👩‍💻 Author

**Vijayashree**
Frontend Developer

---

## ⭐ Future Improvements

* Rate limiting OTP requests
* OTP expiration cleanup job
* UI validation & error handling
* Unit & integration tests

---

Feel free to fork, explore, and extend 🚀
